# abstract
Each year, nearly 90,000 people in the United States are diagnosed with a primary brain tumor, and over 1 million are currently living with one. Of those diagnosed, nearly 20,000 lose their lives annually. Early detection is imperative - but analyzing brain scans is time-consuming, high-stakes, and heavily reliant on radiological expertise. With a growing shortage of radiologists, the risk of misdiagnosis becomes more tangible due to intensive and strenuous analysis; differentiating between types of brain tumors can also often be complex and ambiguous.

Machine learning-driven analysis facilitates quicker and more accurate diagnoses of meningioma, glioma, and pituitary brain tumors, helping reduce the strain on medical professionals and improve patient outcomes though earlier detection. It can also pave the way for breakthroughs in science by enabling researchers to investigate direct links between brain tumors and various neurological or systemic diseases more efficiently.

Trained on T1-weighted, T2-weighted, and T1 contrast-enhanced MRI brain scans, I the fine-tuned state-of-the-art EfficientNet-B2 model, achieving an average accuracy of 98.8%, and F1-score of 0.99 across 5 runs. To improve model interpretability, I implemented Grad-CAM, visualizing the regions influencing the model’s predictions.


# implications & future research
AI advancements in medical imaging can exceptionally decrease the margin of human error, and observe subtle abnormalities in MRI scans, which may otherwise be imperceivable. If implemented in hospital and medical settings, this model enables earlier, more accurate detection of brain tumors, leading to the potential of saving more lives, improving patients' quality of life, and ultimately placing less strain on radiologists. Furthermore, this model can also be implemented in research, particularly in neuroscience, potentially facilitating in finding a direct link between brain tumors and neurological functions and disorders, expediting scientific breakthroughs and our understanding of the brain. 

In the future, I plan to explore more adjustments within the model’s architecture - such as the addition of convolutional layers or different state-of-the-art transfer learning models - to see if I could further optimize the model’s performance or draw more valuable insights. Additionally, I could improve the model’s classification by identifying specific tumor subtypes, which would enhance diagnostic precision and help tailor treatment and intervention strategies more effectively. To make the process of using this model easier, I could also implement a feature in which the tumor, if found, is segmented within the MRI image, providing a visual representation of the tumor's location. This future iteration of my model may require work with a radiologist or a hospital/medical research institute, in providing comprehensive, real-world MRI images and further assistance in this model's development.
